eth/67: Removal of GetNodeData (#4938)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-4938.md

---
eip: 4938

> title: "eth/67: Removal of GetNodeData"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "eth/67: Removal of GetNodeData"
description: <short description, less than 140 characters, basically a tweet>
```

> author: Marius van der Wijden @MariusVanDerWijden , Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>, Gary Rong <garyrong@ethereum.org>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
author: Marius van der Wijden (@MariusVanDerWijden), Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>, Gary Rong <garyrong@ethereum.org>
```

> author: Marius van der Wijden <marius@ethereum.org>, Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>, Gary Rong <garyrong@ethereum.org>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
author: Marius van der Wijden @MariusVanDerWijden , Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>, Gary Rong <garyrong@ethereum.org>
```
We require at least one of the authors to use a github handle so that the bot can tag them.

> author: Marius van der Wijden (@MariusVanDerWijden), Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>, Gary Rong <garyrong@ethereum.org>

Reviewer: When possible, GitHub user names are weakly preferred as our EIP tooling works better with them.  This isn't a hard requirement or blocker, just a nice-to-have if available.

> discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/issues/202

Reviewer: Must be an Ethereum Magicians thread.

Reviewer 3: This I don't understand. We have always used the devp2p issue tracker for the discussions of p2p protocol EIPs. Why does it have to change all of a sudden?

Reviewer 3: What I mean is, `discussions-to` of EIP-868, EIP-778, EIP-1459 was allowed to be a link to an ethereum/devp2p issue. For past eth protocol updates, `discussions-to` was a link to an ethereum/EIPs issue.

EIP-1 says an Ethereum Magicians thread is 'preferred'. It doesn't say 'mandatory'.

status: Draft

> last-call-deadline: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

type: Standards Track
category: Networking
created: 2022-03-23

> requires: 2464, 2482

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
requires: 2464, 2481
```
I think this is the EIP number you intended?

---

## Abstract

> The [Ethereum Wire Protocol][eth] defines request and response messages for exchanging data between clients. The `GetNodeData` request retrieves a set of trie nodes or contract code from the state trie by hash. We propose to remove the `GetNodeData` and `NodeData` messages from the wire protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Ethereum Wire Protocol](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/caps/eth.md) defines request and response messages for exchanging data between clients. The `GetNodeData` request retrieves a set of trie nodes or contract code from the state trie by hash. We propose to remove the `GetNodeData` and `NodeData` messages from the wire protocol.
```

## Motivation

`GetNodeData` and `NodeData` were introduced in protocol version `eth/63` to allow for a sync mode called "fast sync", which downloads the Ethereum state without executing all blocks. The sync algorithm works by requesting all state trie nodes and contract codes by their hash.

Serving `GetNodeData` requests requires clients to store state as a mapping of hashes to trie nodes. Avoiding the need to store such a mapping in the database is the main motivation for removing this request type.

> Some client implementations, notably OpenEthereum and Erigon, do not serve `GetNodeData` at this time, because they do not store the state in a compatible way. The Ethereum Wire Protocol should accurately reflect the capabilites of clients, and should not contain messages which are impossible to implement in some clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client implementation may not serve `GetNodeData` because it does not store the state in a compatible way. The Ethereum Wire Protocol should accurately reflect the capabilities of clients, and should not contain messages which are impossible to implement in some clients.
```
EIPs should be written to be read by someone at an indefinite time in the future, so we shouldn't be discussing current state of current clients but instead abstractly talking about theoretical clients.

Reviewer 3: Alternative suggested text: 

```
At this time, some client implementations cannot serve `GetNodeData` requests because they do not store the state in a compatible way. The Ethereum Wire Protocol...
```

## Specification

Remove the following message types from the `eth` protocol:

* `GetNodeData (0x0d)`
   * **(eth/66)**: `[request_id: P, [hash_0: B_32, hash_1: B_32, ...]]`
* `NodeData (0x0e)`
   * **(eth/66)**: `[request_id: P, [value_0: B, value_1: B, ...]]`

## Rationale

> The Geth team has discussed this proposal with the developers of Erigon, Nethermind and Besu. We agreed `GetNodeData` is a roadblock that needs to be removed in order to improve state database implementations.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is "history", which isn't appropriate for an EIP.  Feel free to mention it in the discussions-to though as it is probably useful information for people to talk/read about.

The last bit of the sentence, "`GetNodeData` is a roadblock that needs to be removed in order to improve state database implementation." is something that might be appropriate for the motivation section (if it isn't present already).

Reviewer 3: I added this sentence here specifically because the EIP-1 guidelines say:

> The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.

Reviewer: That is a mistake (carryover from the EIP process from years ago), PR opened to fix it here: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/4951  Feel free to comment there if you like.

Reviewer 3: Sentence removed

> A replacement for `GetNodeData` is available in the [snap protocol][snap]. Specifically, clients can use the [GetByteCodes][snap-getbytecodes] and [GetTrieNodes][snap-gettrienodes] messages instead of `GetNodeData`. The snap protocol can be used to implement the "fast sync" algorithm, though it is recommended to use it for "snap sync".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A replacement for `GetNodeData` is available in the [snap protocol](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/caps/snap.md). Specifically, clients can use the [GetByteCodes](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/snap.md#getbytecodes-0x04) and [GetTrieNodes](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/snap.md#gettrienodes-0x06) messages instead of `GetNodeData`. The snap protocol can be used to implement the "fast sync" algorithm, though it is recommended to use it for "snap sync".
```

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP changes the `eth` protocol and requires rolling out a new version, `eth/67`. Supporting multiple versions of a wire protocol is possible. Rolling out a new version does not break older clients immediately, since they can keep using protocol version `eth/66`.

> This EIP does not change consensus rules or the EVM and does not require a hard fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP does not change consensus rules of the EVM and does not require a hard fork.
```

## Security Considerations

None

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

[eth]: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/caps/eth.md
[snap]: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/caps/snap.md
[snap-getbytecodes]: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/snap.md#getbytecodes-0x04

> [snap-gettrienodes]: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/snap.md#gettrienodes-0x06

Reviewer: Please inline links, rather than using a references section.  This is especially true for links that only have one instance in the document (like all of these).
